Handling slumps:
When a player is going through a slump, whether offensively or defensively, it is important to stay positive as a coach.  Remind the player of how good they were before the slump.  Remind them that everyone goes through slumps from time to time.  Just try not to get discouraged and let it impact the rest of your game.  If a hitter is struggling at the plate and just comes back to the dugout after another strikeout, it is important that they are in a good mindset when they take the field.  They cannot let that negativity transfer into other areas.  Also, emphasize again that even the greatest players of all time have experienced slumps during their career.

Handling nerves:
Nerves are common.  Whether it is a player stepping up to the plate for the very first time, or seasoned player taking the mound in a playoff game.  Nerves are a part of the game and show that you actually care.  Just make sure that they players know that it is ok to fail.  Softball is a sport where you fail more times than not.  Look at baseball for instance.  All time greats, hall of famers, get a hit 30% of the time.

Handling team conflicts:
This can be a tough one at times.  Some of your players may know each other outside of the team.  Some may be neighbors or classmates.  Not all relationships are positive ones and pre-existing relationship issues could be joining the team.  It is important to note that softball is a team sport and it takes a team to succeed.  You may not like each other off the field, but when we step on that field we are family and we always have our family's back.  If it becomes too much, reach out to your commissioner/director and see what options may be available.

Handling keeping things fun:
First and foremost, the players should be having fun.  It won't be fun for everyone all of the time.  The best thing to do during practice is to make a game of some drills.  Hand out some small little rewards for the winning player/team in practice.  During games, as a coach you have to keep your cool.  You may not realized it in the moment, but your players watch what you do and hear what you say.  If you keep things light and fun then that should rub off on the players too.